# Big Data and AI Trend Project: GridironIQ

**Note:** This project repository is created in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Big Data Analytics course offered by the Master of Science in Business Analytics program at the Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota.

**Executive Summary:** Our NFL Contract Valuation System aims to predict NFL contracts and guaranteed values for the offensive skilled position groups QB/RB/WR/TE by analyzing player performace statistics alongside historical contract data. We designed the dashboard keeping in mind NFL front offices, sports media analysts and fans that want to see how players are valued relative to the market. Our interactive dashboard includes functionality to predict contracts, compare players, analyze team contracts and enter smart queries such as "Show me undervalued RBs making $5M or less". Full information can be found in our project flier: https://github.com/zhan9921-afk/Big-Data-and-AI-Trend-Project/blob/main/GRIDIRONIQ_flier.pdf

**Pipeline overview, script and dataset:** Our pipeline follows a structured five-stage process designed to transform raw data into actionable insights. It begins with data ingestion, where multiple sources such as roster information, seasonal data and player contract data are collected into a centralized environment. The pipeline then moves into feature engineering, where key variables and metrics are derived to better represent player performance. We then run XGBoost and Classification techniques to obtain predicted vs actual contract information and generate player and roster grades. In the fourth stage, we apply a LLM layer to provide explanations for our predictions. Finally, the pipeline culminates in our interactive dashboards to enable decision-makers to easily interpret and act on the results.
  
  Our Pipeline requires the nflreadpy python package to be installed before running the model pipeline. The full pipeline can be found here: https://github.com/zhan9921-afk/Big-Data-and-AI-Trend-Project/blob/main/complete_modeling_pipeline.ipynb

  The final dataset from used for our pipeline can be found here: https://github.com/zhan9921-afk/Big-Data-and-AI-Trend-Project/blob/main/complete_final_data.csv
